hi I'm gene from true to Earth TV and
spectral energy solutions and I want to
talk to you about something that can be
making you very sick and that's your
water heater this is unfortunately not
very well known and the word has to get
out about this what's happening is your
water heater is a perfect breeding
ground for certain types of bacteria and
it's variable and there isn't really any
way that anyone knows to run a quick
test to see but there is a cure and it's
very simple it's just to run your water
heater at 140 degrees well the first
thing you're gonna say is I can't do
that because I'm gonna get burned and so
is my family and you're right you have
to install a tempering valve now for
some reason 120 degrees is a really good
temperature to grow bacteria and 140
degrees kills it what they found is
certain people are getting very sick and
a lot of times you'll never know that
you got sick from your water heater
because your doctor may just see it as a
respiratory infection you can pick it up
in the shower from the steam mist if you
inhale it you know the bacteria will
travel right through the pipes and come
out you can also get it if you got in to
drink hot water supposedly there's a
couple things that can grow in here that
are pretty bad one is Legionnaires
disease which everybody's heard of the
other is this NTM which is
non-tuberculous mycobacterial infections
and these could be pretty nasty from
what I've read they can um they can get
inside your respiratory system and it's
supposedly almost impossible to get it
out
you can subside it with with you know
treatment and antibiotics but that's all
they can do and if you're compromised if
you have a weak immune system this could
be deadly
there you don't have any hard numbers
now because this isn't being looked at
properly but they suspect there's a
possibility that between five to twelve
thousand people are dying from this a
year so like I said the cure is very
simple you have to run the water heater
or 140 degrees in order to do that and
not be scalded you have to have a
tempering valve no what I have here is a
tako 5000 series tempering valve or some
people call the mixing valve and I'll
look at this closer real quick and I'll
show you how to install it properly and
so either you or your contractor you can
make sure that it's an installed
properly there's there's one way to do
this and make sure to make sure it's
right now this valve the take off 5000
is really nice valve because it's got
high flow rate this will flow about 20
gallons a minute so it won't be a
restriction so you could still take
multiple showers you can do the dishes
at the same time and it's also got a lot
of shutoff feature in it to prevent
scalding or if something happens for the
hot or cold water the valve can sense it
and it'll shut off it's not an anti
scroll valve but it's a nice additional
feature there okay we're gonna take a
quick look at this tako 5000 series
valve one quick note is that you can't
nobody can play with this and change the
setting on it once it's dialed in you
simply pop the cap and the cap has a
notch in it that fits in the valve head
and you set that to 120 degrees at the
sinks and then when you're done you pop
this cap back on and no one can change
the setting forever the way these valves
work is cold water comes in through one
side this is teed off at the cold water
inlet is at the bottom the hot water
comes in from
take at the other side that 140° and it
mixes the two together out to your sinks
and 120 degrees but the key thing here
and this should be done on all hot water
installations is there's a thermal trap
now what a thermal trap is it's a drop
from the hot water outlet down before
you go to the sinks
what this does is it it traps the hot
water in the water heater when you're
not running the faucets and that
increases efficiency if the pipe just
came out and went straight up the hot
water would constantly chase the cold
pipes and it would constantly be losing
heat out of the water heater this this
traps that and the wolf the hop the heat
can't come out on the water heater when
it's off but what that also does is it
lengthens the life of the valve because
this has a thermostatic element in there
and if you have this tied in right out
of the hot outlet it's going to
constantly be you know 24/7 it's going
to be trying to open because it's hot
you want to give this valve a break you
only want it to run when you're actually
running the hot water so that that does
two things for you what you want to do
is make sure your contractor puts this
trapping and what you need is at least
eight inches like a lot of people call
for 12 8 to 12 if it's more it doesn't
matter but you really need at least
eight inches to get that thermal siphon
to stop so that's it that's all you have
to do to make sure your water heaters
not going to grow bacteria set it 240
degrees install a tempering valve
properly make sure it's set to 120
degrees I like to install a permanent
temperature gauge in the line going out
to the sinks so that I can always check
and make sure that it is set to 120 now
there's also a chance you might not
believe everything I'm telling you so if
you put in your search engine on your
computer the case for very hot water
that will bring you to a article in
science news a couple years ago that
talks all about this and raises some
some pretty serious questions this
should be mandated this should be the
only way this is done everywhere for
commercial and residential buildings and
feel free to show this
video to anyone who doesn't believe you
share this with your friends and your
co-workers and make sure that this is
the way it's done for true to earth TV
and spectral energy solutions on gene
have a great day